---
title:  "Mind the Gap: My experience at Grace Hopper"
date:   2015-11-28 14:22 -0800
categories: opinion
header:
    overlay_color: "#000"
    overlay_filter: "0.5"
    overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2015/11/28/cover.jpg
---
Last month, I had the opportunity to attend the [Grace Hopper Celebration for
Women in Computing](http://ghc.anitaborg.org/). For those not familiar with the
event, it is one of the largest gatherings of women technologists at a conference
focusing on technical talks, succeeding as a women in tech, and discussions on
the lack of gender diversity in tech. The tech industry has some of the [worst
ratios](http://www.ncwit.org/sites/default/files/resources/btn_02282014web.pdf)
of gender diversity in the entire US workforce. This was a problem that I
recognized, but at the same time had absolutely no idea how to either address
the issue or help become part of the solution rather than part of the problem.

---

Grace Hopper wasn't my first experience at women in tech events. I had a prior
experience at a local women in tech meetup that was...well...shall we say less
than enlightening. While attending with some friends from my university I was
called out by another female attendee asking why I was there (almost
accusingly). After the event, I ended up backing off for a while on other women
in tech events. I know I need to understand the problem, but if I was to expect
being called out at multiple events that I would go to, I wasn't prepared to
handle that.

Jennifer, a good friend of mine, attended the aforementioned event and suggested
that I try to attend a larger one (specifically mentioning Grace Hopper). She
helped push me out of my comfort zone, assuring me that the crowd I would meet
at a larger event would be different compared to what I experienced at a smaller
one. I credit her for pushing me to attend this year.

So, bags packed and tickets purchased I headed down to Houston.

On the first day of the conference, I have to admit it was a little odd being
one of only a few dozen men at an event of more than 12,000 women. The
environment I could best describe as a Mecca for women technologists. From
descriptions I heard from other women and my own experience going to Hajj as an
American Muslim, I imagined that being in that environment as a women was almost
like a very large family of sorts. Meeting people that are in very similar
situations as your own all experiencing the same challenges and working towards
the same goals.

As a guy there, I expected to feel the exact way women felt in their own tech
environments. I was bracing for comments and call-outs, the odd looks and the
confusion. In other words, I expected the tables to flip. I wasn't really a
stranger to this, being a Muslim in America and someone that looks Middle
Eastern, I've gotten my own share of glances and glares. The most surprising
part of it all?

Nothing happened.

I wasn't called out for being a guy in a crowd of women. I wasn't glared at in
odd ways or talked to differently. The question of "How do you feel as a guy
here?" wasn't even the first thing that was asked by people I talked to.

I suspect the reason for this is that while the ratio is flipped at Grace
Hopper, everyone is so keenly aware of the problems of stereotyping and
unconscious bias that my experience was rather pleasant. I didn't even have to
address the questions about my race or religion (which is portrayed as one that
inhibits women's rights).

---

Having had a chance to adjust, I moved on to attending the sessions. My goal for
going to Grace Hopper was to get a better understanding of three things: the
problem of gender diversity, the ways women address it in their own positions,
and the ways that I can address it as a male in my position. With this in mind
most of the sessions I attended were focused on career building, experiences of
senior women leaders in their positions, and learning what has been or is being
done to solve the gap.

The biggest lesson I learned from the whole event is how valuable diverse
opinions are when brought to the same table. For example, since graduating
college and beginning in the workplace, I decided that I would not work more
than eight hours a day. In a lot of tech companies, engineers will work ten or
eleven hours a day get a project completed or to make a deadline. I didn't want
to bind myself to that lifestyle. My reason for working only eight hours was
purely selfish, I wanted to have time for a social life and time to decompress.
Because of that, I wasn't a strong advocate for keeping the full time job a 40
hour work week because "I'm just a junior engineer" or "I don't need to leave at
5pm, maybe I should just stay a few more hours."

The perspective I got from attending Grace Hopper is that some of these issues
matter quite a lot more to different crowds of people. For example, the 40 hour
work week is critical for engineers that have (or want to have) families. A
large number of attendees I met were or wanted to be married, working, and have
the flexibility to raise a family. Another example is the factor of a woman's
ability to become pregnant as a factor in promotion decisions. I didn't even
consider that something like that would factor into a career discussion.

These are factors I never would have thought of without being in that situation.
It emphasizes the importance of having a diverse voice in gender, age, and race
at all levels of an organization due to the wide range of perspectives you get
from it.

---

The other major lesson I gained from the experience is that a lot of cases of
discrimination or negative comments are usually unintentional. Generally
explicit racism/sexism is easy to see and call out, but comments that are less
easy to spot such as microaggressions or unconscious bias aren't as easy to
remember.

For example, being an Indonesian-American male, I get remarks like "you speak
English really well" or "where are you really from?" quite a lot. Likewise
similar comments are often made towards women, but they usually take the form of
degrading her ability to perform at her job.

Some of the workshops talked about this a little bit and how to combat it in a
more meaningful way. Not combat in an aggressive manner, but in a way that
subtly shifts the mentality of those around you. A large part of the
discrimination occurs is due to human inexperience with a particular scenario.

---

With that experience, would I go again? The answer: likely not (at least not for
another year or so). While I enjoyed myself and think it was good for me to be
part of that conversation, it seems that it would be more constructive for me to
encourage other women and men to go and witness this. Grace Hopper, from what a
lot of my female colleagues have told me, is a chance for them to have the
conversations about being a minority that are difficult to have in their normal
environments. While it's important for men to be part of the conversation as
well, unless the attendance is raised for the event, it feels odd to take that
opportunity away from other engineers that need that community support.

Likely, I'll find myself there at some point soon, but we'll see what next year
brings this way, what progress has been made, and how I can further my role in
the best position.