---
title:  "Beyond Borders: A Recap of the 2018 Muppies Conference"
date:   2018-11-11 15:56 -0800
categories: opinions
header:
    overlay_color: "#000"
    overlay_filter: "0.5"
    overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2018/11/11/SunGroupShot.jpg
---
This year I was honored with acceptance into [Muppies](https://muppies.org), an
organization of over 2,500 Muslim professionals spanning 25 different countries.
I started attending the Seattle chapter’s events last year and thought it would
be an interesting experience to join it as my second professional association
(my first one being the [Association for Computing Machinery](https://acm.org)).
As part of that experience, I decided to travel to Toronto to attend their
annual conference. Over the past weekend, 300 Muslim professionals from 5
different countries gathered around the theme of “Beyond Borders”.

I found this topic particularly resonant for myself. Today’s world and political
climate centers strongly around the concepts of nationalism and patriotism. Two
topics that society deems for certain hyphenated populations inappropriate. I
grew up at the intersection of American and Indonesian culture, and often my
experiences were very different from not just my peers in age and geography, but
also among my Muslim peers.

Most of my generational peers in the Muslim community typically were
second-generation immigrants from Pakistan, Egypt, or a myriad of other cultures
in the Muslim world. I found very few peers that had mixed backgrounds like my
own. Add to that the experience of climbing through the social ladder and one
finds a very unique (and perhaps strange) combination of experiences that didn’t
quite mesh with the people around me.

---

It was with this mindset that I landed in Toronto for the conference. I arrived
with several other like-minded professionals from industries as vast as Finance,
Law, Business, Tech, and Social Work. The commonalities that bound us were our
identification as being Muslims. Not in the typical theological sense all too
common with these gatherings, but in the sense of a shared common identity.
There was an understanding there that we all came from those same formative
experiences, traumas, and values that came from this faith tradition.

This theme was reflected as the keynote sessions began. A reminder about how our
faith defines us through the values of humility, service, and leadership set the
tone for the conference. Specifically that we all had the capability and the
blessings to be able to create change in our communities and across the world.

> "The biggest challenge to the Muslim community is the weaponization of
> information. It's important to understand the playbook that's being used
> against us and other faith-based communities." -Haroon Ullah

However, this optimistic view had a looming shadow over it. It’s no surprise the
Muslim community faces challenges throughout the world. [Haroon Ullah](
https://twitter.com/haroonullah) explained to us the playbook that was being
leveraged against Muslims and placed this in the scope of the current discourse
on information warfare. The narrative that exists currently is not something
that was manufactured and beamed into people, but rather it’s an exploitation of
woes and worries of the populace to incite an agenda. One point I appreciated
from this discussion is that technology is not the end-all solution. Ullah
argued that the platforms need to take a stance on the content they choose to
allow on their platform.

[Dr. Mehmood Khan](http://www.pepsico.com/docs/album/LeadershipDoc/pepsico_khan)
talked about how the scope of problems facing our generation are growing.
Problems like these and others are ones that are tackled by leveraging our
leadership and influence. That leadership doesn’t come just from your “skill” or
“field” but from your experience and passion. What you learn will become
irrelevant within the next three to five years. Passion transcends the borders
that knowledge typically imposes. Muslims used to be one of the most influential
centers of knowledge and we should seize that tradition and the values from it.
Using this passion and influence is how we can address problems like world
hunger, access to food and water, and climate change. Our communities are the
ones that will have to face this. We have a tradition of excellence and we
should strive for that and divorce ourselves from the post-colonial minority
mentality we’re all too prone to.

However this leadership will not come without challenge or effort. [Qaisar
Shareef](https://twitter.com/SQS12) shared a great story of his experience
starting Proctor & Gamble in Pakistan. A large part of what leading in the 21st
century entails is getting out of your comfort zone, meeting people where they
are, and understanding cultures and bridging connections between them. Muslims
and other hyphenated minorities are in the positions to be able to make those
connections and we shouldn’t completely whitewash our ability to do so.

> Diversity is being invited to the party. Inclusion is being asked to dance.
> Engagement is being able to pick the playlist. -Farzana Nayani

Our cultural experiences define who we are. Creating an inclusive environment is
a critical part of that as [Farzana Nayani](https://farzananayani.com/)
explained. Leading our communities and generations through these problems
involve building inclusion at every level and not just for a business case.
Inclusion comes by leveraging three forces: Public pressure, employee advocacy,
and leadership initiative. Each of these points have influence on how the others
act in public. The recent [#GoogleWalkout](https://twitter.com/googlewalkout) I
and other participated in was an example of how public pressure and employee
advocacy could cause pressure on leadership. A large part of this is looking at
how unconscious bias affects our communities (even within our minority circles).
Farzana challenged attendees to look at chairs next to them and ask themselves:
Who is missing from that chair? Why are they not here? Could we have more women?
More people of different genders? More Afro-Muslims? More mixed Muslims? Part of
leadership is using the position you have to bring others to the table.

The challenge a lot of us faced was finding out how to apply those principles
and concepts into the real world. [Chris Blauvelt](
https://twitter.com/arblauvelt) talked about his experience in creating
[LaunchGood](https://launchgood.com), a crowdfunding site for Muslims. He
talked about how we can solve our problems as communities and use that as a
means of benefiting people around us. Islamic history was the center of the
world for a long time and we need to capture that tradition and bring it back.
LaunchGood, for Chris, was an example of how creating a high quality product for
Muslims was a viable means to make a difference and create meaningful change.
It was proof that we could move from having our own problems to being our own
heroes. But it requires getting us out of the victimization mindset and moving
to leverage our amazing skills and work in our communities.

Closing off the conference, [Amughan Ahmad](https://twitter.com/ArmughanAA)
talked about what leadership really means in practice. One of the most important
assets that we have as Muslims is our stories and experiences. When sharing
those stories, it can help us to inspire ourselves and others through difficult
times. As technology and especially Artificial Intelligence become more
prevalent in our economy, the jobs of the future will require that empathy and
storytelling to move the world forward. To lead in the next 50-100 years, we
need servant leaders; people who put the priority of the people and organization
above themselves. Leaders who give credit to people working hard to changing the
status quo. Leaders who aren’t held hostage to their past and instead take it as
a challenge to excel.

---

Over the two days and many sessions I couldn’t capture in just one post, I had
three major takeaways for how moving our world beyond borders could happen.

First, we need to look at the problems that affect everyone. We will be facing
some of the biggest challenges our civilization has ever faced, global problems
require global effort to tackle and address them.

Second, you cannot create truly meaningful solutions unless they are meaningful
for all. Inclusion and creating an environment where people can share what they
bring to the table in a way that’s not just corporate talk is critical to
addressing global problems.

Third, true leaders are ones that serve others. This is unfortunately a talent
that seems to be lost or less visible in today’s world. Having leaders that are
willing to serve the least advantaged of their population or community are the
ones that will help create the solutions that carry our world forward.

What I learned during the conference was that we do have the capability to
succeed, we just need to find ways to bring others on board in a way that they
feel truly included in your solutions. That requires patience, service, and
passion to change the world.